Optimal Ball Recycling

Please note that the reviews do not necessarily include all comments that arose
during electronic discussion of your paper (or all additional opinions from
outside experts), and so they may not necessarily reflect the final evaluation
of the PC.  Nevertheless, we hope that you will find the reviews useful, and
that you will take the reviewers' suggestions into consideration as you revise
your paper for the final proceedings version.

Best regards,

Timothy Chan (SODA 2019 PC Chair)


----------------------- REVIEW 1 ---------------------
PAPER: 38 TITLE: Optimal Ball Recycling
AUTHORS: Michael A. Bender, Jake Christensen, Alexander Conway, Martin
Farach-Colton, Rob Johnson and Meng-Tsung Tsai


----------- Overall evaluation ----------- The paper introduces an interesting
new variant of the balls-into-bins problem, which is rather orthogonal to the
classical variants. Here, m balls are thrown into n bins according to some
fixed distrbution p. Afterwards, in each round one bin is chosen by some
strategy A, and the balls in this bin are rethrown randomly into the bins. The
objective is to find a strategy A that maximizes the number of rethrown
(recycled) balls.

The authors give excellent motivation for the new problem, as a model for
insertion and update buffers using B-trees and hash tables. In both cases, the
number of recycled balls correspond directly to the efficiency gains obtained
by the buffers. While for update buffers, nothing is known about the
distribution p, the authors argue convincingly that for insertion buffers the
distribution is close to uniform (Lemma 3.1). Thus, they study the new
balls-into-bins problem in these two cases: either for general distributions,
or more specifically for the uniform distribution.

The authors consider three strategies: FULLEST_BIN picks the bin with the most
balls; RANDOM_BALL picks the bin of a u.a.r. ball, and GOLDEN_GATE cycles
through the bins, always picking the next non-empty one. For every distribution
p, the authors show that RANDOM_BALL achieves the same asymptotic performance
as the optimal strategy for p. Thus RANDOM_BALL is a universally good strategy.
On the other hand, FULLEST_BIN can be surprisingly bad, losing a factor of
\Theta(m) for some distributions. However, if p is the uniform distribution,
then FULLEST_BIN and GOLDEN_GATE are both competitive: They achieve the optimal
recycling rate up to a (1+o(1)) factor, while RANDOM_BALL loses a constant
factor in [1+\eps, 2-\eps].

The proofs are obtained by combining several nice tricks. By studying an
appropriately chosen statistics of the stationary distribution of the process
for fixed strategy A and bin distribution p, they obtain general upper bounds
on the recycling rate for any strategy. The performance of RANDOM_BALL is then
estimated directly if m= Omega(n), and for m=o(n) the authors introduce an
auxilary almost-optimal strategy AGGRESSIVE_EMPTY based on the optimal strategy
for a subset of bins. On this subset, the analysis of RANDOM_BALL can be
reduced to the case m = Omega(n), while on the other bins it can be shown that
RANDOM_BALL behaves similarly as AGGRESSIVE_EMPTY. 

The analysis for uniform distribution is based on similar tricks, especially on
analyzing the right statistics of the stationary distribution. This part is a
bit less deep than the other, but adds to the nice and complete picture that
the paper gives. In general, the proofs are very nicely written.

The paper is generally well-written, and the proofs are sound. I only found a
small number of minor bugs, listed below.

Of course, the new model is only an approximation to the problem of real buffer
handling. The largest difference might be that the authors assume the choices
of the balls to be independent of each other, which is not true in reality
(round i and round i+1 might be correlated). The authors do amend their work by
some experiments, but they all include the independence assumption by design. I
am not expert enough to assess the real-world implications of the model, but I
do think that the model is an excellent theoretical starting point, and fits
perfectly into SODA. 

In summary, the paper has convinced me: The model is very interesting,
well-motivated, and has the potential to serve as a basis for an important
practical problem. The results and proofs are non-trivial, and appropriate for
SODA. On top, the authors seem to be familiar with the practical aspects of the
problem, and indicate that the existing code should be adapted according to
their theoretical findings. (But I am not expert enough to judge this latter
claim.) Thus, I recommend the paper for publication.



MINOR COMMENTS:

- In the proof of Lemma 4.4, the step from (6) to (7). I fail to see why this
  is an inequality rather than an equality. After all, \sum_j f_j E[Z(\chi^A)
  \mid \phi_j] = E[Z]. For the last term in (6), you say that R^A_j should be
  the random variable of how many balls are recycled given the jth bin is
  chosen by A. This doesn't really make sense to me, since then in the
  calculation we would compare an expectation with a random variable, so I
  assume you mean the conditional expectation instead of the random variable.
  (As it was in Lemma 4.2.) But then \sum_j f_j R^A_j = R^A, so we should have
  equality.

So I think that Equation (9) should be an equality, and the inequality only
comes in the next step (10). 

- abstract, introduction: "wildly successful" sounds odd to me (as a non-native
  speaker).
- Section 2. When you mention the work of Vöcking, you forgot to refer to the
  paper [41].
- Lemma 4.2: In the text, R^A should be R^A_L.
- Lemma 4.5: One of the p is typeset in non-bold, same in Lemma 4.6.
- Lemma 4.6: Does the term "stateless" includes "deterministic"? Otherwise your
  notation needs some explanation.
- Corollary 5.1: The second = should be \leq as well.


----------------------- REVIEW 2 ---------------------
PAPER: 38 TITLE: Optimal Ball Recycling
AUTHORS: Michael A. Bender, Jake Christensen, Alexander Conway, Martin
Farach-Colton, Rob Johnson and Meng-Tsung Tsai


----------- Overall evaluation ----------- The authors study a ball and bins
problem motivated by applications in external memory data structures, namely
B-trees. Roughly speaking, we have n bins and m balls and each time we can pick
a bin and distribute its balls according to some distribution among the rest.
And the goal is to maximize the number of balls distributed at each step. I
quite like the motivation for the problem and I believe for many applications
it actually makes a lot of sense. 

The authors provide the following main results:

(main result): A tight upper bound for the recycling rate of any algorithm. The
bound is interesting in the sense that it has two branches: one for m >= n
(many balls) and the other one for m < n (few balls). And it turns out that the
behaviour of the problem changes significantly based on these two cases. 

On top of this main result, the authors also give a number of interesting
results that complement the above. For example, they give a bad examples that
shows an obvious “best” strategy can actually be pretty bad (“fullest bin”).
Then they analyze the case of uniform distribution (which from a practical
point of view might make the most sense). Here, the authors delve into finding
the best constants hidden in the O-notation .

In terms of techniques, they look at the problem as a Markov process and use
some toolboxes from here. However, as far as I can see, the main difficulty
here is to nail the correct behaviour of the optimal strategy (few balls vs
many balls cases). To do this, in fact two different arguments are required and
thus the first challenge is to know what is needed to be proven for each case!
In essence, the proof is interesting and it needs quite a bit of work. 

Writing is the weakest part of the paper. It seems that paper has suffered a
lot by moving very relevant things to the appendix. In particular, Appendix A
is almost a must-read. Many of the basic concepts or notations have not been
clearly defined (stateless at page 7, the notion of (AX)_j), and there is also
very confusing referencing back and forth which requires constant flips back
and forth. Furthermore, some of the statements seems inconsistent. Proof of
Lemma 4.1 is referred to the appendix but in the appendix there is no clear
proof and it feels like a mess! Lemma A.2 certainly needs more than just one
line for its proof and notion of “ergodic” is thrown in there without ever
being defined!


----------------------- REVIEW 3 ---------------------
PAPER: 38 TITLE: Optimal Ball Recycling
AUTHORS: Michael A. Bender, Jake Christensen, Alexander Conway, Martin
Farach-Colton, Rob Johnson and Meng-Tsung Tsai


----------- Overall evaluation ----------- The paper considers an interesting
problem in which m balls are thrown to n bins i.i.d using some distribution p.
Then, at each step, one non empty bin in picked  and ALL is balls are recycled,
i.e. they are re-thrown according to p. Note that the number of bins remains m
at any time.  The goal is to maximize the recycling rate which is the expected
number of balls recycled in the stationary distribution.

This problem has some application in memory access (B trees) and databases.

The authors consider several strategies for picking the recycled bin for two
cases m>=n and n<m.  For m>= n they show that the strategy of recycle a bin of
a random ball achieves a recycle rate which is constant away from the optimal
rate. For the special case of uniform probability they show that the natural
strategy of Fullest bin is optimal within additive constant. Unfortunately,
there are no results for fullest bin for arbitrary distribution.  For m<n they
show that the natural fullest bin strategy can be as far as m from the optimal
recycle rate (by a simple example of very skewed distribution) where random
strategy is only constant away from optimal. This is done by showing first that
Aggressive empty strategy (i.e., recycle ball in every bin whose probability is
less than 1/m) is optimal up to constant factor.

The techniques are based on probabilities estimations. In retrospect that are
all quite standard but to get them it was non trivial. For example, Lemma 4.4
shows an upper bound on the recycle rate for strategies of stationary
distribution. Then an upper bound of the rate follows immediately. Let the
L_{1/2} semi norm of the probability vector p be the square of the sum of the
square root of the coordinates. Then by they show that for m>=n the rate is at
most m divided by the L_{1/2} semi norm of p and. It is quite easy to show that
random ball strategy easily achieves such rate up to a constant.

Overall, nice collection of results. For m>=n the results are quite expected
(though it is somewhat disappointing that there is no analysis for fullest bin
except for the uniform probability case). For m<=n (I am not sure how
interesting this case) the results are some somewhat surprised though not so
much in retrospect.

